=================================
MY (favourite) PassWord GENerator
=================================

This tool implements a simple random password generation algorithm, and can
optionally generate hashes suitable for including in `/etc/shadow` or
`.htpasswd` files.

It requires just core Perl modules for its basic functionality - generating
passwords and hashing them with system `crypt()`. `{SSHA}` hash format requires
`Digest::SHA` and `MIME::Base64` modules which are optional and not loaded
unless required.


Installation
============

The tool can be installed as a usual Perl module with::

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    sudo make install

It will install `mypwgen` executable under `/usr/local/bin/`, plus a manual
page for it generated by `perldoc`. You may consult `ExtUtils::MakeMaker` for
other options.

Alternatively, you can just drop `mypwgen` anywhere you like and make it
executable.


Usage
=====

Consult `man mypwgen` or `perldoc mypwgen` for usage information.


"Friendly" mode
===============

A special "friendly" mode ensures that the password has no more "special"
punctuation characters than required. This makes the passwords easier to
remember so the users won't resort to writing them down - which is a common
attack point when the password policy is too strict.


Notes
=====

The algorithm is quite simple:

1. Choose a required number of characters from each character class at random.
2. Pad with randomly-chosen characters from all the classes.
3. Shuffle the characters to obtain the password.

When it comes to cryptography or passwords the `rand()` function is not
considered a good source of random numbers. So, to follow a common trend here,
`mypwgen` uses `/dev/urandom` (or, optionally, `/dev/random`). As both devices
produce random octets modulo bias compensation is performed.

The characters are shuffled using Fisher-Yates algorithm.

There is no comprehensive analysis performed of how strong the passwords
generated by this tool really are. Considering password length rarely exceed 12
characters the outcome can be considered sufficiently unpredictable for a few
dozen personal passwords generated over time. However hundreds of passwords for
all the organization's staff may be another case. No warranty here, use at your
own risk.

The defaults are chosen based on my personal preference - 8-character
alphanumeric password with occasional punctuation mark is quite strong, plus I
personally have no trouble remembering half a dozen of them which is the whole
point.

Relying on password strength only is not a good security practice, remember to
rotate the passwords on a regular basis at all times.


References
==========

.. _Myths about /dev/urandom: https://www.2uo.de/myths-about-urandom/
